paper.md, before:

---
title: "Real-time dashboards for monitoring adherence to PBM recommendations via graph-based EDS: a case study from Grenoble University Hospital"
author:
  - Thomas Boulier
  - Paul-Antoine Beaudoin
  - Alexandre Moreau-Gaudry
date: "2025"
bibliography: refs.bib
csl: iospress.csl
link-citations: true
---

## 1. Introduction

Patient Blood Management (PBM) is an evidence-based, multidisciplinary approach to optimize patient care and reduce unnecessary transfusion [@shander2022global]. It relies on three pillars: detection and correction of preoperative anemia, reduction of perioperative blood loss, and optimization of anemia tolerance. Despite strong national [@theissen2024perioperative] and international [@tibi2021sts] guidelines, implementing PBM in routine practice remains challenging [@godonReductionRedBlood2024].

In France, the *If-PBM* program was launched as an innovative funding initiative to promote PBM adoption. Yet, a key missing piece is the ability to monitor adherence in real time to evaluate progress and identify improvement opportunities. This paper presents an approach to integrating PBM quality dashboards from a clinical data warehouse.

## 2. Materials and Methods

### PREDIMED data warehouse
The *PREDIMED* platform (*Plateforme de Recueil et d’Exploitation des Données bIoMédicales*) is the clinical data warehouse of Grenoble Alpes University Hospital [@Artemova2019].  
It combines a Hadoop/ELK stack with the **ArangoDB** multi-model graph database, allowing semantic linkage between entities (patients, transfusions, lab tests, prescriptions, hospital stays, etc.).

### Extraction and linkage strategy
Each PBM indicator requires combining several data sources:
- preoperative hemoglobin and iron status (pillar 1),
- intraoperative blood loss and transfusion timing (pillar 2),
- postoperative anemia tolerance (pillar 3).

The graph model enables flexible traversal of relationships between transfused blood units and corresponding patient records.  
Data pipelines are orchestrated via **Talend** and **Python scripts**, producing aggregated metrics quarterly.

### Automation and visualization
Dashboards are generated automatically using SQL and Python scripts and deployed on a secure intranet portal.  
They display compliance trends, transfusion rates, and adherence to Hb thresholds and preoperative anemia correction.

## 3. Results

- **Dashboards deployed:** ?? dashboards across all surgical units.  
- **Frequency:** quarterly updates since 2024.  
- **Volume:** several million transfusion and lab events processed.  

Example indicators include:
- proportion of transfusions respecting Hb thresholds;
- rate of preoperative anemia correction;
- temporal trends per department.  

Preliminary analyses reveal variations between departments and an overall improvement in compliance over time.


## 4. Discussion

Integrating PBM indicators into a graph-based EDS enables **continuous quality monitoring** at hospital scale.  
Compared to prior PBM feedback systems [@Mehra2015], our approach generalizes automation and data integration within a real hospital information system.  
Remaining challenges include data latency, data completeness, and user adoption.  

Future developments will leverage the **regional D2H platform**, built on a modern data stack (Dagster, dbt, OMOP), to generalize real-time PBM monitoring and support adaptive interventions such as micro-learning and feedback loops.

## References

Commit message:

Refactor paper.md to clarify the integration of PBM quality dashboards and update the description of the PREDIMED data warehouse and future developments.

paper.md, after:

---
title: "Real-time dashboards for monitoring adherence to PBM recommendations via graph-based EDS: a case study from Grenoble University Hospital"
author:
  - Thomas Boulier
  - Paul-Antoine Beaudoin
  - Alexandre Moreau-Gaudry
date: "2025"
bibliography: refs.bib
csl: iospress.csl
link-citations: true
---

## 1. Introduction

Patient Blood Management (PBM) is an evidence-based, multidisciplinary approach to optimize patient care and reduce unnecessary transfusion [@shander2022global]. It relies on three pillars: detection and correction of preoperative anemia, reduction of perioperative blood loss, and optimization of anemia tolerance. Despite strong national [@theissen2024perioperative] and international [@tibi2021sts] guidelines, implementing PBM in routine practice remains challenging [@godonReductionRedBlood2024].

In France, the *If-PBM* program was introduced to support the implementation of PBM through targeted funding. One of its outcomes is to develop dashboards for monitoring adherence to PBM guidelines. This provides funded centers with tools to track progress and identify areas for improvement.

This work describes the method we used in Grenoble Alpes University Hospital for integrating PBM quality dashboards using data from a clinical data warehouse.

## 2. Materials and Methods

### PREDIMED data warehouse
The *PREDIMED* platform (*Plateforme de Recueil et d’Exploitation des Données bIoMédicales*) is the clinical data warehouse of Grenoble Alpes University Hospital [@Artemova2019]. It combines an ELT stack with the **ArangoDB** multi-model graph database, which enables semantic linkage between entities (patients, transfusions, lab tests, prescriptions, hospital stays, etc.).

### Extraction and linkage strategy
Each PBM indicator requires combining several data sources:
- preoperative hemoglobin and iron status (pillar 1),
- intraoperative blood loss and transfusion timing (pillar 2),
- postoperative anemia tolerance (pillar 3).

The graph model enables flexible traversal of relationships between transfused blood units and corresponding patient records. Data pipelines are orchestrated via **Talend** and **Python scripts**, producing aggregated metrics quarterly.

### Automation and visualization
Dashboards are generated automatically using SQL and Python scripts and deployed on a secure intranet portal. They display compliance trends, transfusion rates, and adherence to Hb thresholds and preoperative anemia correction.

## 3. Results

- **Dashboards deployed:** ?? dashboards across all surgical units.  
- **Frequency:** quarterly updates since 2024.  
- **Volume:** ?? transfusion and lab events processed.  

Example indicators include:
- proportion of transfusions respecting Hb thresholds;
- rate of preoperative anemia correction;
- temporal trends per department.  

Preliminary analyses reveal variations between departments and an overall improvement in compliance over time.


## 4. Discussion

Integrating PBM indicators into a graph-based EDS enables **continuous quality monitoring** at hospital scale. Compared to prior PBM feedback systems [@Mehra2015], our approach generalizes automation and data integration within a real hospital information system. Remaining challenges include data latency, data completeness, and user adoption.

Future developments involves a refactoring of the current data stack with modern tools (Dagster, dbt, OMOP), in a region-wide initiative called **D2H**. The objective is to generalize real-time PBM monitoring and support adaptive interventions (such as micro-learning).

## References
